Dear members of the Methods in Ecology and Evolution editorial board,

On behalf of my co-authors, I am pleased to submit our manuscript entitled
“Predicting metawebs: transfer of graph embeddings can help alleviate spatial
data deficiencies” for consideration as a Perspective Article in Methods in
Ecology and Evolution. This manuscript is the off-shoot of another manuscript
that is currently under review at Methods in Ecology and Evolution (ID
MEE-21-11-855) and discusses topics previously included in the original
manuscript but were removed so as to keep the focus of the original manuscript
on the methodological framework and maintain some sense of brevity. We have
discussed this decision to split the original manuscript with the **TK**
**Associate editor** (Dr. Nicolas Lecomte), who has approved this decision. This
submission thus puts forward a bigger discussion as to how the transferring of
graph embeddings could prove to be a practical tool in addressing the spatial
data deficiencies we are faced with when working with ecological networks.

Metawebs (networks of potential interactions within a species pool), have the
potential to be a powerful starting point from which to understand how
large-scales species interaction networks are structured. However, the
challenges inherit in sampling species interactions makes assembling sufficient
data at a large enough scale a tedious and costly process. Predictive methods
can help in circumventing these limitations, of these predictive tools available
graph embeddings (rather than focusing on the list of species interactions)
holds, great potential. In this perspective, we outline how the challenges
associated with inferring metawebs line-up with the advantages of graph
embeddings; as well as how the choice of the species pool not only has
consequences on the reconstructed network, but also embeds hypotheses about
which human-made boundaries are ecologically meaningful.

The work described here has not been published elsewhere. All authors agree with
the the manuscript content and its submission to the journal. No part of this
manuscript has been published in any form elsewhere or is being considered for
publication elsewhere while it is being considered for publication in this
journal. This manuscript appeared as a preprint on EcoEvoRXiV with the following
DOI: **TK**.

We look forward to your editorial decision on this manuscript.